---
layout: post
title: Patching Bomb Lab of DrEvil
description: Writeup on patching functionalities of a binary on Linux with shared object injection.
category: Spinel
---

### Introduction

This one is gonna be exciting.
Today I'm patching a binary bomb.

First, for the context, Bomb Lab is an exercise where each student has an unique binary (a.k.a bomb) with multiple stages.
For each stage, he has to input a correct "key" to "defuse".
Of course if the input is wrong then the bomb explodes and he gets some minus points.

The goal of the exercise is to learn about assembly, reverse engineering, stuffs like that.
Searching online with keywords like "Bomb Lab" or whatever would show a bunch of tutorials for it already.

I want to do something different.
I want to patch the bomb for 2 functionalities:
- Portable bomb: I can work with the binary from my computer or anywhere else, instead of school computer
- Imploding bomb: The bomb won't notify the teacher when it explodes, even when running on school computer.

Before you say "oh my bomb doesn't do that", yes I know there are 2 different kinds of bomb: notify-bomb and offline-bomb.

### Bomb Lab

#### How to patch ?

First I need to understand how the binary works.
Some wonderful tools to do analysis:
- `gdb`: Classic debugger
- `objdump`: Dump assembly sources
- `ltrace`: See all dynamic library calls
- `strace`: See all system calls

In normal scenarios, the binary would use several dynamic library calls.
The most common one is from C standard library such as `printf` or `scanf`.
But it could be from other shared objects as well.

The way I use to patch this binary is to replacing these functions with my own functions.
An analogy for this is like in the heist movies when all the cameras are hacked to not show the thieves.

In short, the binary would load a list of shared objects before executing the main code.
By setting environement variable `LD_PRELOAD`, I can load some of my own shared objects before the real version.
This means the binary would use my modified version of the functions.

This works on all Unix-like systems such as Linux, BSD or Solaris.
An equivalent of this on Windows is called DLL injection.

To see the list of loaded share objects, use `ldd`.
The output should be something like this.
```
libc.so.6 => /lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libc.so.6
```
#### Analysis

By default, the binary would not run on normal home computer.
Doing some analysis with `ltrace`, I can see the checking mechanism goes like:
- First it gets the hostname of running machine, using `gethostname`.
This hostname would be compared with a hardcoded list of "allowed hosts".

=> Patched by modifying `gethostname` so it returns an allowed hostname.

- Next it gets the IP of the server, using `gethostbyname`.
Then it tests connection to the server by opening a connection.

- For every successful/failed attempt on a stage, it would again gets the IP of the server, using `gethostbyname`.
Then it sends a report to the server and waits for acknowledgement from server.

=> Patched by creating a fake server, and then modifying both `gethostbyname` to point to this server.

As a note, the server would located on port 15214, and the acknowledgement response should just be a HTTP message "OK".

#### Write patch.

1) `gethostname` patch: Straightforward
```
#include <string.h>

int gethostname(char *hostname, size_t len) {
  char *masked_hostname = "france.polytechnique.fr";
  strcpy(hostname, masked_hostname);
  return 0;
}
```

2) `gethostbyname` patch: Use `dlsym` to get the real "gethostbyname" function, and call it with modified arguments
```
#define _GNU_SOURCE

#include <stdlib.h>
#include <dlfcn.h>

struct hostent *gethostbyname(char *hostname) {
  char *masked_hostname = "127.0.0.1";
  struct hostent *(*original)(char *hostname) = dlsym(RTLD_NEXT, "gethostbyname");
  return original(masked_hostname);
}
```

3) Fake server (in Python)
```
import socket

s = socket.socket(socket.AF_INET, socket.SOCK_STREAM)
s.bind(('127.0.0.1', 15214))
s.listen(1)

while True:
    connection, client_address = s.accept()
    print("Receive: {}".format(connection.recv(1024)))

    response = b"HTTP/1.0 200 OK\r\nConnection: close\r\nMIME-Version: 1.0\r\nContent-Type: text/plain\r\n\r\nOK"
    connection.send(response)
    connection.close()

s.close()
```

4) Finally, combine 2 patches into 1 source file and compile it with
```
gcc -shared -ldl -o patch.so patch.c
```

To run the patched binary, first launch the server in the background and then the patched binary with
```
LD_PRELOAD=./patch.so ./bomb
``` 

Moral of the story here is `LD_PRELOAD` is a very cool.
The End.
