---
layout: post
title: Let's build a home server (part 1)
description: Part 1 of the series Garnet - building a home server&#58; Hypervisor and planning
category: Garnet
---

### Introduction

I have a spare laptop laying around the house not doing anything.
It's kinda an average laptop with 1TB drive with 4GB RAM, nothing too fancy.
So I thought it would be nice to turn it into a home server, for data backup and practicing self-hosting.

Instead of running 10 different services on the same computer, I'm using virtualization to create multiple machines, each for a different job.
Since the laptop is not very strong, I have to be very careful with memory management of the servers.

### Hypervisor

For the main operating system, I'm using latest Debian stable, or Debian Buster.
In fact most of the VMs in the server would be Debian/Ubuntu based, with some exception like the firewall.
But of course CentOS or FreeBSD should work as well.

Here I'm using VirtualBox for the virtualization instead of qemu+kvm because it's just easier to work with.
To install, download the .deb package from [here](https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Downloads) and install with
```
sudo apt-get install ./virtualbox-6.1_6.1.0-xxxxxx-Debian~buster_amd64.deb
```

**Note**: Use `apt` to install instead of `dpkg` because it can pull all dependencies for you, also you can remove/purge that package later with `apt`.

After installing, go to File > Host Network Manager and create a virtual network to use later.
By default it is called `vboxnet0` with IP address `192.168.56.1/24` and DHCP server enable.
Additionally, some preferences can also be changed in File > Preferences.

### Quick planning

For the first draft, my internal network would have a gateway/firewall with some webservers.
The gateway would do all the network segmentation and handle services such as DHCP or DNS later.
Later it would also serve as a proxy between the internal network and the local physical subnet.

For the environment, I'm using Wifi to go to the Internet, interface wlp2s0.
All internet traffic from webservers would go through the firewall for filtering and then through that interface (bridged).

A last thing to do is to come up with a naming scheme for the cluster.
I'm not very creative with names, but luckily there is a website that can help me with that: [namingschemes.com](https://namingschemes.com/)
I end up naming my cluster by NATO alphabet: alpha, bravo, charlie,...
You know what, in the end I might be able to remember the NATO alphabet, as a side benefit.


