---
layout: post
title: Let's build a home server (final)
description: Last post of the series Garnet - building a home server&#58; The End
category: Garnet
---

### Foreword

It has been an incredible journey but every good thing comes to the end.

As I mention from the first post, my spare laptop has around 4GB RAM for me to use.
And I have hit that limit, the machine becomes unresponsive now I couldn't create or start a new machine anymore.

In addition to it,I feel like the project has gone way far off from the original idea.
And it's quite time-consuming for me as well.
So I probably have to call this project off here.

#### What did I learn ?

Oh definitely a lot.
First time ever I gets my hand on with LDAP, LDAP replication and NFS server.
And I gets much more comfortable with things like webservers and databases.
Overall I feel my debugging skill has improved.

I think my cluster structure is kinda fine and scalable, with all central communications.
I definitely going to come back to this in the future.
I take a lot of inspiration from my own university computer structure.

#### If possible what would I done more ?

First and foremost I need a better way to "generate" a template machine.
For now I only clone from my Debian-base then change a bunch of setup, as well as add users/mounting/...
It's quite tedious.
I see why people are using things like Ansible or Puppet now.

What I have in mind before deciding to stop is to install
- A second PostgreSQL server
- A central ackup server (Bacula / Rsync)
- A server for monitoring (Nagios)
- A firewall / logging mechanism in Bravo gateway
- An email server (Postfix / Dovecot)
- A "public-facing" webserver, acts as a frontend for all services.
- A load balancer (with iptables)

In term of security details
- SSL/TLS supports for everything
- Configure LDAP with more local admin and not just 1 big admin
- Limit disk usage for logging / users space

#### The End ?

For this one, yes.
As I said, I feel like this project has gone off course a lot.
It is now like a "mimic a small profressional environment" instead of "homelab with local webservers".
Doesn't mean it's not helpful, just that I feel like I should take a break.

With that being said, I'm going to create another new cluster, this time with more functional machines, like blog servers, local storage, git servers,...
I'm also might consider renting an actual online server to practice this.
Stay tuned to see more posts from it.

