---
layout: post
title: Let's build a home server (part 9)
description: Part 9 of the series Garnet - building a home server&#58; Foxtrot (NFS server)
category: Garnet
---

### Foxtrot

I like how I'm already at part 9 of the series and I still haven't able to setup any actual webservers.
At least not in this post.

I still need a central filesystem.
It would contain home directories of all users, as well as shared files between computers.

#### Installation

Install NFS server with
```
apt-get install nfs-kernel-server
```

#### Export NFS shares

For now I'm going to share just 1 directory `/share/users` for home directories of users.
```
mkdir -p /share/users
```

Also `/etc/exports` would look like this
```
/share/users  172.16.12.0/24(rw, sync) # Flag ro for read-only
```

Then update NFS export table and restart the NFS server
```
exportfs -a
systemctl restart nfs-kernel-server
```

#### Creating directories

Before mounting the share to other machines, let's create home directories with correct permissions first.
Here I'm doing it manually for user webdev1.
In general if there are a lot of users then a bash script is needed (using ldapsearch for owners/permissions).

```
mkdir /share/users/webdev1
chmod 700 /share/users/webdev1
cp -R /etc/skel/. /share/users/webdev1
chown -R webdev1:webdev /share/users/webdev1
```

Optionally I can even create folders in `/var/spool/mail`, edit umask in `.bashrc` or add default `.vimrc`.

#### Mounting NFS shares

To mount NFS shares to each computer, first install the required utilities
```
apt-get install nfs-common
```

I can list the NFS export table to confirm the NFS server is running with
```
showmount -e foxtrot
```

Now I need to mount the shares to each machines
```
mkdir /users
mount foxtrot:/share/users /users
```

To make this mount persistent through reboots, add to `/etc/fstab` (Use IP is better in case DNS server is down)
```
foxtrot:/share/users   /users  nfs  defaults  0 0
```

#### Notes

By default requests from remote root would be mapped to nobody:nogroup user.

`no_root_squash` flag allows root on remote machine to act on NFS share with root permission.
This might lead to certain vulnearabilities.
For example, write a suid/sgid binary to the share for privilege escalation.
