---
layout: post
title: Let's build a home server (part 7)
description: Part 7 of the series Garnet - building a home server&#58; Configure LDAP clients
category: Garnet
---

### LDAP Authentication

The whole point of LDAP servers is to centralize all authentication there.
So let's configure the machines to use the LDAP server.

#### Installation

Install required packages
```
apt-get install libnss-ldap libpam-ldap
```

For now I let all users to be able to login to every machine, using their own accounts.

#### Configure NSS

Config file is at `/etc/libnss-ldap.conf`.
Important entries are
```
base dc=garnet
uri ldap://172.16.12.3 ldap://172.16.12.4
rootbinddn cn=admin,dc=garnet
```

Then edit `/etc/nsswitch.conf` to make the machine uses the LDAP server.
```
passwd:   files systemd ldap
group:    files systemd ldap
shadow:   files systemd ldap
```

Optionally delete `files systemd` to make the machine only uses LDAP authentication.
However if the LDAP server is down then not even root can login to the machine.

#### Configure PAM

Config file is at `/etc/pam_ldap.conf`.
Important entries are
```
base dc=garnet
uri ldap://172.16.12.3 ldap://172.16.12.4
rootbinddn cn=admin,dc=garnet
```

In the initial installation, `/etc/pam.d/*` should have `pam_ldap.so` in the correct position.

As a note, `nscd` for local cache is installed as a required package.
Its settings can be keep as default.

#### Configure sudo

As stated before, group "admin" should have full permission everywhere.
I can enable that by adding
```
%admin  ALL=(ALL:ALL) ALL
```

Finally restart nscd because nscd might cache the previous results
```
systemctl restart nscd
```

#### Testing

`getent passwd` should see a list of LDAP accounts.

#### Notes

At the moment all users can login to all machines, which is not desirable.
This would be changed later.

`ldap://` protocol is not encrypted and could be sniffed (haven't tested).

If `rootbinddn` is enable, this means root access to that machine can read the plain-text password in `/etc/libnss-ldap.secret` or `/etc/pam_ldap.secret`.
This usually means full root access to LDAP server.

Only tutorials suggest deleting `use_authtok` in `/etc/pam.d/common-password` but it seems to work fine without, not sure the reason.
